A newly discovered biotype of coconut rhinoceros beetle (CRB-G) is rapidly killing coconuts and other palms on Guam. Following a failed eradication at- tempt, CRB-G proved hard to control because it is resistant to Oryctes nudi- virus (OrNV), which was previously used as the preferred biological control agent for control of CRB outbreaks on Pacific Islands and elsewhere.

The overall objective of this project is to stop the uncontrolled outbreak on Guam. Pacific-based entomologists working on this problem agree that the most feasible solution is to find a new isolate of OrNV which is highly pathogenic to CRB-G. Foreign exploration has already discovered an OrNV isolate from an infected CRB-G collected in the Philippines. If laboratory bioassays indicate that this isolate is pathogenic for CRB-G, it will be pro- pogated and distributed throughout Guam by autodissemination. All pre- vious OrNV releases on Pacific Islands resulted in immediate and sustained suppression of CRB damage to low levels and prevented tree mortality. We hope to find an OrNV isolate which will produce similar results.

Guam is currently experiencing an uncontrolled and unmonitored island- wide CRB-G outbreak which was triggered by abundant CRB-G breeding sites in the form of dead and dying vegetation left in the wake Typhoon Dolphin which occured in May 2015. of a recent typhoon. Most of these breeding sites are inaccessable to sanitation efforts, being either in the jungle or on military land (which covers one third of Guam). A positive feedback cycle has begun whereby large numbers of adult beetles are killing large numbers of palms which become breeding sites which generate even higher numbers of adults. Severe damage to Guam’s palms prompted the Governor of Guam to declared a state of emergency in July 2017.

Entomologists working on this problem agree that the most feasible tactic to halt tree mortality and suppress damage to tolerable levels is establishment of biological control using an isolate of OrNV which is highly pathogenic to CRB-G. Concurrent with establishment of CRB-G biocontrol, success of the project will be monitored in a quarterly, island-wide tree health survey and incidence of OrNV infection will be monitored in a subsample of all field collected CRB-G.

If the Guam CRB-G infestation cannot be controlled, it is expected that most palms on the island will be killed and CRB-G will spread to other islands and beyond. If CRB-G invades smaller islands and atolls where coconut is the tree of life, a human tragedy will ensue. On larger islands, coconut and oil palm industries will be severely impacted. Attempts to organize a regional project in response to CRB-G are underway.
